Avatar Aang
Main article: Aang
Avatar Aang (Chinese: 安昂; pinyin: Ān'áng) (voiced by Mitchel Musso in the unaired pilot,[18] voiced by Zach Tyler Eisen in Avatar: The Last Airbender,[19] voiced by D. B. Sweeney in Books One and Two of The Legend of Korra, and portrayed by Noah Ringer in The Last Airbender,[20]) is the protagonist of the original series and the current Avatar, a cyclically reincarnating being who maintains world balance.[21][22] Aang often acts in a fun-loving, carefree manner.[23] His pacifism and vegetarianism are primary traits of Buddhism. The creators intended Aang to "defeat enemies with his wits" and be a "trickster hero".[24][25] Though Aang is often frivolous and enthusiastic, he becomes serious during a crisis.[26][27]

In the original series, Katara and Sokka rescue Aang from a century of suspended animation due to being frozen in an iceberg. Having already mastered his native Airbending, Aang learns Waterbending from Katara and later Pakku at the North Pole in Book One,[28] Earthbending from Toph in Book Two,[17] and Firebending from Zuko in Book Three.[29][30] Throughout the series, Aang aids the Water Tribes and the Earth Kingdom, whom the Fire Nation has oppressed. Unwilling to kill Fire Lord Ozai despite the past Avatars insisting on it, Aang ultimately learns the ancient Lion-Turtles' technique of energybending, which allows the user to give or take away a person's bending, and uses it to render Ozai a non-bender.

In The Legend of Korra, it is revealed that Aang, with the help of his friends, created the United Republic of Nations. He also married Katara and had three children, with his youngest son Tenzin restoring the Air Nomads while instructing the next Avatar, Korra. Like Roku before him, Aang appears at times before his reincarnation Korra, serving as a spiritual advisor, prior to their connection being destroyed by Unalaq.

Appa
Main article: Appa (character)
Appa (阿柏; Ābǎi) (voiced by Dee Bradley Baker in the original animated series[20][31]) is Aang's male flying bison, animal guide and spirit companion. He is Aang's best friend and serves as the group's mode of transport around the world.[9] He can fly and can use his tail to create powerful gusts of air. According to Aang, flying bisons were the first Airbenders.[32] The show's creators, Michael Dante DiMartino and Bryan Konietzko, have described Appa's appearance as a cross between a bison and a manatee.[33] He is known to shed his coat at the end of winter.[34]
Momo
Momo (模模; Mómó) (voiced by Dee Bradley Baker in the original animated series) is the only known Winged Lemur. Avatar: The Last Airbender co-creator Bryan Konietzko admits that Momo is his favorite character to draw and that his body language is derived from memories of a childhood cat.[35] Momo was introduced when Aang finds him at the Southern Air Temple and then keeps him as a pet.[36] Although Momo has been in many dangerous situations while traveling with the protagonists, he has also been of aid to them and a source of comic relief throughout the series. According to the creators, Momo was intended to represent the spirit of Monk Gyatso, Aang's mentor.[37] Momo is a cross between Bat and a Lemur and is the last of his kind in the show much like Appa (though it is possible based on the descriptions by the Pirate Captain in "The Waterbending Scroll" and by Tho in "The Swamp" that a few more of his kind may exist in captivity and circuses elsewhere in the Four Nations).[38][39] Momo was introduced in the episode "The Southern Air Temple". In the episode, Aang finds Momo at the Southern Air Temple and then keeps him as a pet. After Momo eats a peach, Aang decides to name him Momo, which is Japanese for "peach" and the name of Tibetan dumplings.[40]
Sokka
Main article: Sokka
Sokka (索卡; Suǒkǎ) (voiced by Jack DeSena in the original series,[19] voiced by Chris Hardwick in the sequel series, and portrayed by Jackson Rathbone in the live-action film,[20]) is a 15-year-old warrior of the Southern Water Tribe, and Katara's older brother.[17] With no bending power of his own, Sokka relies largely on a metallic boomerang, a blunt metal club, a machete, and later a black jian, or sword, created from the metals of a meteorite.[41] Surprisingly in an inhabitant of a mystical world, Sokka is an engineer and something of a jack-of-all-trades, in which respect he is easily able to understand the Fire Nation's advanced technology, and perfects the design of the hot air balloon.[42] In addition, he is both heterodox and resourceful in his endeavors,[43] and a source of comic relief throughout the series. Sokka was in love with the Northern Water Tribe princess Yue at the end of Book One and later shifted his affections to the Kyoshi Warriors' leader Suki in Books Two and Three.

In the sequel series, flashbacks reveal Sokka was the first representative of the Southern Water Tribe to sit on the Republic City Council, and possibly its first chairman. He died a few years after Aang, when the next Avatar, Korra, was still a child.

Katara
Main article: Katara (Avatar: The Last Airbender)
Katara (卡塔拉; Kǎtǎlā) Is voiced by Mae Whitman in the original series,[19] Eva Marie Saint in Books One, Two, and Four of the sequel series, and portrayed by Nicola Peltz in the live-action film.[20]

Katara is a 14 year-old Waterbending master from the Southern Water Tribe and a close friend of Avatar Aang.

In the original series, Katara is known to be very caring and compassionate while also having a strong determination to stand up against systems of oppression and injustice. While she may have been a relatively inexperienced Waterbender at the start of the series, by the end of Book One Katara manages to claim the title of "Waterbending Master" surpassing the skillset of Avatar Aang. Having left the Northern Water Tribe at the beginning of Book Two Katara continues to train Aang's as his teacher. In the episode "The Deserter" Katara learns that she possesses healing abilities, which she often uses to help her friends throughout the series. In addition to healing, Katara's abilities as a Waterbender range from temperature control, (turning water into ice shaped weapons such as spears, hooks, and blades as well as controlling steam) using streams of water to grab onto people and platforms, being able to manipulate the water in clouds, creating pockets of air in large bodies of water, being able to pull water from the air and plants, and the ability to control the water inside another living organism also known as Bloodbending.

In The Legend Of Korra, Katara is revealed to have married Aang and had three children with him. It is also revealed that she becomes Avatar Korra's Waterbending teacher after the death of Aang.

Toph Beifong
Main article: Toph Beifong
Toph Beifong (北方拓芙; Běifāng Tuòfú) (voiced by Jessie Flower in Books Two and Three of the original series,[31] voiced by Kate Higgins in flashbacks of Books One and Three from the sequel series, and by Philece Sampler in Book Four of the sequel series) is a blind Earthbending grandmaster of the prestigious Beifong family in the Earth Kingdom.[16]

In the original series, Toph helps Aang master Earthbending.[16] Toph is often sarcastic, direct, and confrontational; commonly depicted as the choleric and tomboy of the group.[16] Though blind, Toph can feel vibrations in the earth. Through this heightened sense, she can identify people's locations, their distance from her, and their physical build. She learned this technique from the blind Badger Moles. This 'seismic sense' provides her with a distinct advantage when facing other Earthbenders in combat, as they require contact with the ground and extract rocks from their surroundings. As another result of her blindness, Toph has acute hearing, enabling her to recognize people by the sound of their voices and to eavesdrop on distant conversations.[26] Unlike other Earthbenders, Toph has a distinct style of earthbending not based on Hung Gar but on the Southern Praying Mantis, featuring quick generation of energy and low kicks, to suit her small stature.[44] Toph taught herself metalbending by manipulating the metals' impurities at the end of Book Two and throughout Book Three.[45]

In the sequel series, flashbacks reveal that Toph was the first Chief of the Metalbending Police Force, the police department of Republic City. Toph eventually became a single mother of two daughters: Lin, who eventually succeeded her mother as police chief, and Suyin, who founded a commune of free-thinking Earth and metalbenders known as Zaofu. By the time the series begins, having once lived with Suyin's family in Zaofu, Toph took residence in the Foggy Swamp where she assists Korra.

Zuko
Main article: Zuko
Zuko (祖寇; Zǔkòu) (voiced by Dante Basco in the original animated series,[19] voiced by Bruce Davison in the sequel series and portrayed by Dev Patel in the live-action film,[20]) is the banished prince of the Fire Nation, who ultimately becomes Fire Lord.

When exiled, prior to the beginning of the series, by his father Fire Lord Ozai for forfeiting an Agni Kai, a special firebending duel therewith,[46] Zuko believed that capturing the Avatar would regain his honor.[47] In addition to his firebending, Zuko is proficient in the use of double broadswords wielded in his alter ego of the "Blue Spirit". Zuko's ancestry reflects his own anxieties, in that his paternal great-grandfather Fire Lord Sozin started the war while his maternal great-grandfather Avatar Roku attempted to prevent it.[48] In Book One, Zuko fails many times to capture the Avatar but disguises himself as the Blue Spirit and rescues Aang from Zhao's fortress, and in Book Two, Zuko and his Uncle Iroh earn further displeasure from Ozai and Azula and they are subsequently forced to flee into the Earth Kingdom, where he befriends locals and goes so far as to rescuing them from corrupt Earth Army guards.[46][49] When tempted by his sister Azula's offer of honor's restoration, he betrays his uncle to assist Azula's fight against the Avatar.[50] In Book Three, Zuko eventually rejects his father Ozai's plans and joins Aang.[51] After he learns the secret of Firebending with Aang from two dragons, he becomes Aang's Firebending teacher;[29] helps Sokka rescue prisoners; assists Katara in confronting her mother's killer; and receives his uncle Iroh's forgiveness.[52][53] After defeating Azula, Zuko becomes the new Fire Lord and ends the war.[54]

The sequel series reveals that Fire Lord Zuko aided Avatar Aang reorganizing the Fire Nation's colonies in the Earth Kingdom as a United Republic of Nations, and is the only one of Republic City's founders not to have lived there. After abdicating the throne in favor of his daughter Izumi while her son Iroh later serves as a general in the United Forces, Zuko travels the world as an ambassador for peace and keeping major threats in check while Aang's reincarnation Korra is still a child.

Suki
Suki (蘇琪; Sū Qí) (voiced by Jennie Kwan in the animated series,[31]) is the leader of the exclusively female Kyoshi Warriors, a sect established by the Avatar incarnation of the same name.[23] She is an exceptionally skilled fighter, first meeting Team Avatar when they visited her home of Kyoshi Island, where she captured the intruders. She also humiliated Sokka, causing him to change his chauvinistic ways, eventually striking up a friendship as she taught him how to fight. The two later reunited in Book Two, where she and Sokka began to date. Later in Book Two, she and the Kyoshi Warriors encountered and fought Azula, after which they were defeated and imprisoned. She was liberated by Sokka and Zuko in Book Three,[55] and remained with the protagonists thereafter. Suki joined Toph and Sokka to disable the Fire Nation's air force. The other Kyoshi Warriors were released after the war and allowed Ty Lee to join them. She later served with Ty Lee to serve as Zuko's bodyguards after the war ended, reuniting with Sokka on several occasions.

Iroh
Main article: Iroh
Uncle Iroh (艾洛; Aìluò) (voiced by Mako in Books One and Two of the original series,[19] voiced by Greg Baldwin in Book Three of the original series and Books Two and Three of the sequel series,[56] and portrayed by Shaun Toub in the live-action film,[20]), also known as General Iroh and "The Dragon of the West", is a Firebending master and former heir to the Fire Nation throne. After the death of his son at the Siege of Ba Sing Se, his younger brother Ozai superseded him as Fire Lord.[46] Unlike most firebenders, Iroh lacks hostility toward other nations and generates his fire and lightning not from fury, as is conventional, but from a sense given to him by dragons, the original source of firebending.[29] As a member of the Order of the White Lotus, Iroh has social connections throughout the Four Nations. Iroh is outwardly easy-going and friendly, and particularly fond of food, good tea (ginseng tea is his favorite),[57] the strategy game Pai Sho,[58] cheerful company, and pleasant music.[9] In his old age, he focuses more on relaxation and amusements than on the pursuit of the Avatar, a habit that clashes with the obsessions of his nephew Zuko.[46] At the end of the series, after enlisting his fellow White Lotus members to release Ba Sing Se from the Fire Nation's rule, Iroh reopened his tea shop within the city called "The Jasmine Dragon".[27][54]

In The Legend of Korra sequel series, near the end of his life, Iroh left his physical body and his soul ascended into the Spirit World where he offers his assistance to Aang's reincarnation Korra, and later to Aang's children Tenzin, Kya, and Bumi during their initial visits to the Spirit World. Iroh is also the namesake of Zuko's grandson.

Azula
Main article: Azula
Azula (阿祖拉; Ā Zǔ Lā) (voiced by Grey DeLisle in Books Two and Three of the animated series, and portrayed by Summer Bishil in the live-action film) is Zuko's younger sister and a gifted Firebending master and prodigy, capable of creating blue fire and lightning.

After Zhao's death, Azula is sent by Ozai to capture the Avatar, Zuko, and Iroh. Her amorality and ability to act without hesitation or remorse also accounts for her ability to create lightning, a skill that requires peace of mind.[17] Despite her cruel temperament, she becomes distraught when abandoned by her friends Mai and Ty Lee,[55] and collapses mentally when her father leaves her the now-worthless position of Fire Lord,[30] in which she becomes increasingly irrational, paranoid, and mentally unstable,[27] and ultimately suffers a full psychotic breakdown, in which she is overcome by Zuko and Katara.[54] Following the end of the war, Azula is placed at a mental institution to be closely monitored. As revealed in the comic sequel, The Search, Azula managed to convince Zuko to let her accompany him in the search for their mother. But in reality, her madness tied to the hatred she bears towards her mother, Azula's reasons were to eliminate Ursa upon finding a letter that claimed Zuko to be only her half-brother and thus making her the legitimate heir to the throne. But after her attempt to kill her mother failed, and unable to accept Zuko still caring for her after everything she had done to him, Azula fled into the Forgetful Valley before the letter's contents were later revealed to be false.[citation needed]